doc/website/blog: hibernate-orm support (#2363)
ariga/atlas: doc/website/blog/2023-12-12-hibernate-schema-loader.mdx

---
title: "Announcing Automatic Migrations for Hibernate Users"
authors: dorav
tags: [hibernate, schema, migration]
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import InstallationInstructions from '../../md/components/_installation_instructions.mdx'

:::info TL;DR

You can now import the desired database schema from your Hibernate project into Atlas,
and use it to automatically plan migrations for you.

[See an example](#demo-time)

:::

## Introduction

[Hibernate-ORM](https://hibernate.org/orm/documentation/) is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into

> [the JPA standard](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#hibernate-and-jpa) and the jakarta APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[the JPA standard](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#hibernate-and-jpa) and the Jakarta APIs.
```

Today, we are excited to announce that Atlas now supports loading and managing Hibernate schemas.

> [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is a modern tool for managing your database schema. It allows you to inspect, plan, lint and execute schema changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is a modern tool for managing your database schema. It allows you to inspect, plan, lint and apply schema changes
```
execute to => apply to

to your database. It is designed to be used by developers, DBAs and DevOps engineers alike.

Atlas helps with creating standardized pipelines for managing database schemas. While it is a common practice to manage database access
via an ORM, managing schema changes is still a hard problem. Users often expect to be able to use the same tool to solve
both problems, but alas, that's not always supported.

By utilizing Atlas in a Hibernate project, developers can easily plan, create, visualize and analyze schema changes. Finally,
when it is time to deploy the changes, Atlas will apply the changes in the correct order, keep track of where the
changes were applied (for example production or development databases) and allow you to visualize the current state of the database.

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/ci-cd-guide/database-ci-cd-workflow.png)

Read more about [Atlas' features](/).

:::note
Hibernate support is currently in Beta and we would love to hear your feedback :heart:.
Please reach out to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT) or by opening an [issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/issues/new).
:::

## Integrating Atlas into your Hibernate project

> Managing database schemas using Hibernate is currently not an easy task. Executing automatic, non-reviewable changes to production databases is something recommended to avoid. The Hibernate team [recommends](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html) using an external tool for this task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate ships with an automatic schema management tool called [`hbm2ddl`](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html#schema-generation).
Similarly to Atlas, this tool can inspect a target database and automatically migrate the schema to the desired one. However, the Hibernate team has been advising for years **not** to use this tool in production:
> Although the automatic schema generation is very useful for testing and prototyping purposes, in a production environment, it’s much more flexible to manage the schema using incremental migration scripts.
```

package org.example;

import jakarta.persistence.*;

@Entity
public class MovieParticipation {
    MovieParticipation(Movie movie, Actor actor) {
        this.key = new MovieParticipationKey(movie.id, actor.name);
        this.actor = actor;
        this.movie = movie;
    }

    @EmbeddedId
    public MovieParticipationKey key;

    @ManyToOne(cascade=CascadeType.PERSIST)
    @MapsId("movieId")
    @JoinColumn(name = "movieId")
    Movie movie;

    @ManyToOne(cascade=CascadeType.PERSIST)
    @MapsId("actorName")
    @JoinColumn(name = "actorName")
    Actor actor;
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="MovieParticipationKey">

```java title=src/main/java/org/example/MovieParticipationKey.java
package org.example;

import jakarta.persistence.Column;
import jakarta.persistence.Embeddable;

import java.io.Serializable;

@Embeddable
public class MovieParticipationKey implements Serializable {
    public MovieParticipationKey(Long movieId, String actorName) {
        this.movieId = movieId;
        this.actorName = actorName;
    }
    public Long movieId;

    public String actorName;
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Main">

> ```java title=src/main/java/org/example/Main.java

Reviewer: We can keep the article more concise by focusing only on the migrations part. The e2e is example for testing internally but doesn't add anything to the story. So remove this part

Observe the migration directory, it should contain similar files:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="migrations/20231211114848.sql" default>

```sql
-- Create "movies" table
-- Create "movies" table
CREATE TABLE "movies" (
  "id" bigserial NOT NULL,
  "numberinseries" integer NULL,
  "title" character varying(255) NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY ("id")
);
-- Create "actors" table
CREATE TABLE "actors" (
  "name" character varying(255) NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY ("name")
);
-- Create "movieparticipation" table
CREATE TABLE "movieparticipation" (
  "actorname" character varying(255) NOT NULL,
  "movieid" bigint NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY ("actorname", "movieid"),
  CONSTRAINT "fkaq2kkwvh9870847sm35vtjtiy" FOREIGN KEY ("movieid") REFERENCES "movies" ("id") ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION,
  CONSTRAINT "fktm8fbwa577lnbvwdjegwxvget" FOREIGN KEY ("actorname") REFERENCES "actors" ("name") ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE NO ACTION
);
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="migrations/atlas.sum">

```
h1:Ezh6r7A0pU4XS7PztE87h+aq5PoGGVTd6kaprtpXxas=
20231211114848.sql h1:9ECs2QsjHE8S4PxXxFcoPYaOVUWRjpxHuF8MGFRd3dE=
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> Atlas uses the `atlas.sum` file to protect against conflicting schema changes, you can read about it [here](/versioned/new#recalculating-the-directory-hash).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas uses the `atlas.sum` file to protect against conflicting schema changes, you can read about it [here](/concepts/migration-directory-integrity).
```

to make sure to apply the ignored statements (using `atlas migrate --env hibernate diff --edit`). See more information on manual migrations [here](/versioned/diff)

For example, if you are adding GenerationType.SEQUENCE to the Event entity, you will need to add insert statements to your generated migration file:

```diff
diff --git a/migrations/20231210140844.sql b/examples/with_local_plugin_repository/migrations/20231210140844.sql
index ad80a64..5955834 100644
--- a/migrations/20231210140844.sql
+++ b/migrations/20231210140844.sql
@@ -4,3 +4,6 @@ CREATE TABLE `Event` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `title` varchar(255)
 -- Create "Event_SEQ" table
 CREATE TABLE `Event_SEQ` (`next_val` bigint NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
+ -- Initialize "Event_SEQ" table
+ insert into Event_SEQ values ( 1 );
```

Testing these changes can be done by running the application with a local database and creating the entity. To apply the migration directory
to the local database, use `atlas migrate apply`.
:::

### Testing the migrations

> Having a migration directory is nice and dandy, but we can also apply it to a database without breaking a sweat.

Reviewer: Use more concise and fluff-less language. 
```suggestion
Now that our migration directory is ready, let's see how to apply it to a target database: 
```

Let's start a local PostgreSQL instance:

```bash
docker run -it --rm --name mypostgres -p 5432:5432 -e 'POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password' postgres
```

> And let the magic happen by applying our schema to the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's apply our migrations to the database:
```
Technically, we aren't applying the schema (which is done with the `schema apply` command).

```bash

> atlas migrate apply --env hibernate --url 'postgres://postgres:password@0.0.0.0:5432/?search_path=public&sslmode=disable'

Reviewer: Show the output of this command

```

> To see our java application running, add the following `hibernate.properties` file and run the main function:

Reviewer: Continuing what we said above, drop this part (it doesn't matter how to run the main, for the purpose of this article)

```properties
hibernate.connection.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/postgres
hibernate.connection.username=postgres
hibernate.connection.password=password

hibernate.show_sql=true
hibernate.format_sql=true
hibernate.highlight_sql=true
```

Observe the log output, you should see SQL commands executed by Hibernate similar to these:

```
[Hibernate]
    select
        a1_0.name
    from
        Actors a1_0
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        Actors
        (name)
    values
        (?)
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        Movies
        (numberInSeries, title)
    values
        (?, ?)
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        MovieParticipation
        (actorName, movieId)
    values
        (?, ?)
```

Running the program again, you should see the output:

```
[Hibernate]
    select
        a1_0.name
    from
        Actors a1_0
Found Actor Keanu Reeves
```

### Making changes with confidence

> Lastly, let's explore another powerful feature of Atlas, linting the migration directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas ships with a static code analysis engine that can detect risky schema changes during development or Continuous Integration. This functionality is exposed to users via the `migrate lint` command. Let's demonstrate this capability with an example.
```

Suppose we make the following change:

```diff
--- a/src/main/java/org/example/Movie.java
+++ b/src/main/java/org/example/Movie.java
@@ -10,13 +10,10 @@ public class Movie {

     Movie(String title, Integer numberInSeries) {
         this.title = title;
-        this.numberInSeries = numberInSeries;
     }
     @Id
     @GeneratedValue(strategy = GenerationType.IDENTITY)
     public Long id;

     public String title;
-
-    public Integer numberInSeries;
 }
```

Oh no! We removed a column. Let's see how Atlas handles this change. Run `atlas migrate diff --env hibernate`.
Observe that a new migration file was created:

```sql
cat migrations/20231211124321.sql
-- Modify "movies" table
ALTER TABLE "movies" DROP COLUMN "numberinseries";
```

> We will probably upset the oncall engineer if  deploy this change. Instead let's let Atlas help us
> avoid dangerous schema changes by linting the migration directory and not allowing such a change to get merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this change may be desired, it is an irreversible operation that should be done with caution.
Atlas can help us avoid dangerous schema changes by linting the migration directory and not allowing such a change to get merged.
```

    }
    public Long movieId;

    public String actorName;
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Main.java">

```java
package org.example;

import org.hibernate.SessionFactory;
import org.hibernate.boot.MetadataSources;

import java.util.Set;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SessionFactory sessionFactory = new MetadataSources()
                .addAnnotatedClass(Movie.class)
                .addAnnotatedClass(Actor.class)
                .addAnnotatedClass(MovieParticipation.class)
                .buildMetadata()
                .buildSessionFactory();

        sessionFactory.inTransaction(session -> {
                List<Actor> actors = session.createQuery("from Actor").list();
                if (!actors.isEmpty()) {
                actors.forEach(x -> System.out.println("Found Actor " + x.name));
            } else {
                Movie matrix = new Movie("The Matrix", 1);
                Actor keanuReeves = new Actor("Keanu Reeves");
                keanuReeves.actedIn = Set.of(new MovieParticipation(matrix, keanuReeves));
                session.persist(keanuReeves);
            }
        });
    }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> 

Reviewer 2: Start with visualize, then move to diff and add this note right after the command.

:::note

> Currently, Atlas does not support using generated fields that require data initialization such as GenerationType.SEQUENCE, GenerationType.TABLE, and Generation.AUTO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, Atlas does not support using generated fields that require data initialization such as `GenerationType.SEQUENCE`, `GenerationType.TABLE`, and `Generation.AUTO`.
```

import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

:::info TL;DR

You can now import the desired database schema from your Hibernate project into Atlas,
and use it to automatically plan migrations for you.

[See an example](#demo-time)

:::

## Introduction

[Hibernate-ORM](https://hibernate.org/orm/documentation/) is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into
[the JPA standard](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#hibernate-and-jpa) and the jakarta APIs.

Today, we are excited to announce that Atlas now supports loading and managing Hibernate schemas.

[Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is a modern tool for managing your database schema. It allows you to inspect, plan, lint and execute schema changes
to your database. It is designed to be used by developers, DBAs and DevOps engineers alike.

Atlas helps with creating standardized pipelines for managing database schemas. While it is a common practice to manage database access
via an ORM, managing schema changes is still a hard problem. Users often expect to be able to use the same tool to solve
both problems, but alas, that's not always supported.

> By utilizing Atlas in a Hibernate project, developers can easily plan, create and analyze schema changes. Finally,

Reviewer 2: Also visualize

when it is time to deploy the changes, Atlas will apply the changes in the correct order, keep track of where the
changes were applied (for example production or development databases) and allow you to visualize the current state of the database.

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/ci-cd-guide/database-ci-cd-workflow.png)

Read more about [Atlas' features](/).

:::note
Hibernate support is currently in Beta and we would love to hear your feedback :heart:.
Please reach out to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT) or by opening an [issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/issues/new).
:::

## Integrating Atlas into your Hibernate project

> Managing database schemas using Hibernate is currently not an easy task. Developers feel that [they can't trust](https://stackoverflow.com/a/221422/1708860) Hibernate to manage their schemas.
> In fact, Hibernate themselves recommend using an external tool:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Managing database schemas using Hibernate is currently not an easy task. Executing automatic, non-reviewable changes to production databases is something recommended to avoid. The Hibernate team [recommends](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html) using an external tool for this task.
```

> Although Hibernate provides the update option for the hibernate.hbm2ddl.auto configuration property,
this feature is not suitable for a production environment. [...] You should always use an automatic schema migration tool and have all the migration scripts stored in the Version Control System.
>
> — [Hibernate User Guide](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html)

This is where Atlas comes in. Atlas can read Hibernate schema and plan database schema migrations.

### How does it work?

> Atlas compares two database schemas and creates a migration plan to get from one's state to the other. The database schema can be read directly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atlas compares two database schema states and plans a migration to get from one state to the other. The database schema can be read directly
```

                <version>0.1</version>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </pluginManagement>
</build>
```

> To check the installation, run `mvn help:describe -Dplugin=hibernate-provider -Dgoal=schema`

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The plugin adds a configurable Gradle task (or a Maven Mojo) that prints the Hibernate schema without requiring a database connection.
However, the task needs to be configured with the database dialect. We can do this by creating a `schema-export.properties` file in the
resource directory. For example, for MySQL / PostgreSQL:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="MySQL" label="MySQL" default>

```properties
jakarta.persistence.database-product-name=MySQL
jakarta.persistence.database-major-version=8
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL">

```properties
jakarta.persistence.database-product-name=PostgreSQL
jakarta.persistence.database-major-version=15
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Lastly, we need to configure Atlas to use this schema and configuration by creating an `atlas.hcl` file
and adding the definition of the Hibernate schema:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="Gradle" label="Gradle" default>

> ```hcl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
```

data "external_schema" "hibernate" {
  program = [
    "./gradlew",
    "-q",
    "schema",
    "--properties", "schema-export.properties"
  ]
}
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Maven" label="Maven">

> ```hcl

Author: Cool, I didn't know I can do that!

data "external_schema" "hibernate" {
  program = [
    "./mvn",
    "-q",
    "hibernate-provider:schema",
    "-Dproperties", "schema-export.properties"
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

And the Atlas environment configuration:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="MySQL" label="MySQL" default>

> ```hcl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
```

env "hibernate" {
  src = data.external_schema.hibernate.url
  dev = "docker://mysql/8/dev"
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
  format {
    migrate {
      diff = "{{ sql . \"  \" }}"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL">

```hcl
env "hibernate" {
  src = data.external_schema.hibernate.url
  dev = "docker://postgres/15/dev?search_path=public"
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
  format {
    migrate {
      diff = "{{ sql . \"  \" }}"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Project Setup

For this demo, we are going to use Gradle and PostgreSQL. You can take a look at the complete example [here](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/tree/master/examples/e2e_java_example).

If you haven't already, install Atlas from macOS or Linux by the following (or taking a look at our [installation guide](/getting-started#installation)):

```bash
curl -sSf https://atlasgo.sh | sh

> ```

Reviewer 2: There's a component named `InstalltionInstructions`.

---
title: "Announcing Automatic Migrations for Hibernate Users"
authors: dorav
tags: [hibernate, schema, migration]
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

:::info TL;DR

You can now import the desired database schema from your Hibernate project into Atlas,
and use it to automatically plan migrations for you.

[See an example](#demo-time)

:::

## Introduction

> Hibernate, is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hibernate is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into
```

> the JPA standard and the jakarta APIs.

Reviewer 4: Links supporting the claim?

Author: https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#hibernate-and-jpa

I'll add it there, I am indeed missing a link to Hibernate

Today, we are proud to announce that Atlas now supports loading and managing Hibernate schemas.

[Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is a modern tool for managing your database schema. It allows you to inspect, plan, lint and execute schema changes
to your database. It is designed to be used by developers, DBAs and DevOps engineers alike.

Atlas helps with creating standardized pipelines for managing database schemas. While it is a common practice to manage database access

> via an ORM, managing the schema changes is still a hard problem. Users often expect to be able to use the same tool to solve

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
via an ORM, managing schema changes is still a hard problem. Users often expect to be able to use the same tool to solve
```

---
title: "Announcing Automatic Migrations for Hibernate Users"
authors: dorav
tags: [hibernate, schema, migration]
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

:::info TL;DR

You can now import the desired database schema from your Hibernate project into Atlas,
and use it to automatically plan migrations for you.

[See an example](#demo-time)

:::

## Introduction

> [Hibernate-ORM](https://hibernate.org/orm/documentation/), is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Hibernate-ORM](https://hibernate.org/orm/documentation/) is one of the most popular ORMs for Java, so much so that parts of it have evolved into
```

[the JPA standard](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#hibernate-and-jpa) and the jakarta APIs.

> Today, we are proud to announce that Atlas now supports loading and managing Hibernate schemas.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, we are excited to announce that Atlas now supports loading and managing Hibernate schemas.
```

[Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is a modern tool for managing your database schema. It allows you to inspect, plan, lint and execute schema changes
to your database. It is designed to be used by developers, DBAs and DevOps engineers alike.

Atlas helps with creating standardized pipelines for managing database schemas. While it is a common practice to manage database access
via an ORM, managing the schema changes is still a hard problem. Users often expect to be able to use the same tool to solve
both problems, but alas, that's not always supported.

> By utilizing Atlas in a Hibernate project, developers can easily plan, create and analyze schema migrations changes. Finally,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By utilizing Atlas in a Hibernate project, developers can easily plan, create and analyze schema changes. Finally,
```

when it is time to deploy the changes, Atlas will apply the changes in the correct order, keep track of where the
changes were applied (for example production or development databases) and allow you to visualize the current state of the database.

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/ci-cd-guide/database-ci-cd-workflow.png)

> Read more about [Atlas features](/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read more about [Atlas' features](/).
```

:::note
Hibernate support is currently in Beta and we would love to hear your feedback :heart:.
Please reach out to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT) or by opening an [issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/issues/new).
:::

## Integrating Atlas into your Hibernate project

Managing database schemas using Hibernate is currently not an easy task. Developers feel that [they can't trust](https://stackoverflow.com/a/221422/1708860) Hibernate to manage their schemas.
In fact, Hibernate themselves recommend using an external tool:

> Although Hibernate provides the update option for the hibernate.hbm2ddl.auto configuration property,
this feature is not suitable for a production environment. [...] You should always use an automatic schema migration tool and have all the migration scripts stored in the Version Control System.
>
> — [Hibernate User Guide](https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html)

> Atlas can read Hibernate schema and plan database schema migrations.

Reviewer 3: This sentence feels a bit random.

I would write something along the lines of "This is where Atlas comes in. Atlas can read Hibernate..."

Author: Big like 👍

### How does it work?

> Atlas compares two database schemas and can create a migration plan accordingly. For example the database schema can be read directly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Atlas compares two database schemas and creates a migration plan to get from one's state to the other. The database schema can be read directly
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="Gradle Kotlin" label="Gradle Kotlin" default>

```gradle
plugins {
    id("io.atlasgo.hibernate-provider-gradle-plugin") version "0.1"
}
```

> To check the installation, run: `./gradlew help --task schema`

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Gradle Groovy" label="Gradle Groovy" default>

```gradle
plugins {
    id "io.atlasgo.hibernate-provider-gradle-plugin" version "0.1"
}
```

> To check the installation, run: `./gradlew help --task schema`

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Maven" label="Maven">

```xml
<build>
    <pluginManagement>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>io.atlasgo</groupId>
                <artifactId>hibernate-provider-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>0.1</version>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </pluginManagement>
</build>
```

> To check the installation, run `mvn help:describe -Dplugin=hibernate-provider -Dgoal=schema`

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

The plugin adds a configurable Gradle task (or a Maven Mojo) that prints the Hibernate schema without requiring a database connection.

> However, the task needs to be configured with the database dialect, we can do that by creating a `schema-export.properties` file in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, the task needs to be configured with the database dialect. We can do this by creating a `schema-export.properties` file in the
```

resource directory. For example, for MySQL / PostgreSQL:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="MySQL" label="MySQL" default>

```properties
jakarta.persistence.database-product-name=MySQL
jakarta.persistence.database-major-version=8
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL">

```properties
jakarta.persistence.database-product-name=PostgreSQL
jakarta.persistence.database-major-version=15
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> Lastly, we need to configure Atlas to use this schema and configuration by creating an `atlas.hcl`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Lastly, we need to configure Atlas to use this schema and configuration by creating an `atlas.hcl` file
```

and adding the definition of the Hibernate schema:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="Gradle" label="Gradle" default>

```hcl
data "external_schema" "hibernate" {
  program = [
    "./gradlew",
    "-q",
    "schema",
    "--properties", "schema-export.properties"
  ]
}
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Maven" label="Maven">

```hcl
data "external_schema" "hibernate" {
  program = [
    "./mvn",
    "-q",
    "hibernate-provider:schema",
    "-Dproperties", "schema-export.properties"
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> And the atlas environment configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And the Atlas environment configuration:
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="MySQL" label="MySQL" default>

```hcl
env "hibernate" {
  src = data.external_schema.hibernate.url
  dev = "docker://mysql/8/dev"
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
  format {
    migrate {
      diff = "{{ sql . \"  \" }}"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL">

```hcl
env "hibernate" {
  src = data.external_schema.hibernate.url
  dev = "docker://postgres/15/dev?search_path=public"
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
  format {
    migrate {
      diff = "{{ sql . \"  \" }}"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Project Setup

> For this demo, we are going to use Gradle and PostgreSQL. You can take a look at the complete example [here](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/tree/master/examples/e2e_java_example)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this demo, we are going to use Gradle and PostgreSQL. You can take a look at the complete example [here](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/tree/master/examples/e2e_java_example).
```

If you haven't already, install Atlas from macOS or Linux by running:
```bash
curl -sSf https://atlasgo.sh | sh
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Add a link to more download options (windows etc.)

Create a project and add the plugin and the following dependencies:

```gradle
plugins {
    id("io.atlasgo.hibernate-provider-gradle-plugin") version "0.1"
}

dependencies {
    implementation("org.hibernate.orm:hibernate-core:6.4.0.Final")
    implementation("org.postgresql:postgresql:42.7.0")
}
```

> Copy the following java files to the directory `src/main/java/org.example`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Copy the following Java files to the directory `src/main/java/org.example`:
```

import org.hibernate.boot.MetadataSources;

import java.util.Set;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SessionFactory sessionFactory = new MetadataSources()
                .addAnnotatedClass(Movie.class)
                .addAnnotatedClass(Actor.class)
                .addAnnotatedClass(MovieParticipation.class)
                .buildMetadata()
                .buildSessionFactory();

        sessionFactory.inTransaction(session -> {
                List<Actor> actors = session.createQuery("from Actor").list();
                if (!actors.isEmpty()) {
                actors.forEach(x -> System.out.println("Found Actor " + x.name));
            } else {
                Movie matrix = new Movie("The Matrix", 1);
                Actor keanuReeves = new Actor("Keanu Reeves");
                keanuReeves.actedIn = Set.of(new MovieParticipation(matrix, keanuReeves));
                session.persist(keanuReeves);
            }
        });
    }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::note
Currently, Atlas does not support using generated fields that require data initialization such as GenerationType.SEQUENCE, GenerationType.TABLE, and Generation.AUTO.

> If needed, you can still export the schema using the flag --enable-table-generators (or -Denable-table-generators using Maven), when applying the schema to your database, you will need

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If needed, you can still export the schema using the flag --enable-table-generators (or -Denable-table-generators using Maven). When applying the schema to your database, you will need
```

> to make sure to apply the ignored statements (using `atlas migrate --env hibernate diff --edit`, see more information on manual migrations [here](/versioned/new))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to make sure to apply the ignored statements (using `atlas migrate --env hibernate diff --edit`). See more information on manual migrations [here](/versioned/new).
```

> For example, if you are adding GenerationType.SEQUENCE to the Event entity, you will to add an insert statements to your generated migration file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if you are adding GenerationType.SEQUENCE to the Event entity, you will need to add insert statements to your generated migration file:
```

```diff
diff --git a/migrations/20231210140844.sql b/examples/with_local_plugin_repository/migrations/20231210140844.sql
index ad80a64..5955834 100644
--- a/migrations/20231210140844.sql
+++ b/migrations/20231210140844.sql
@@ -4,3 +4,6 @@ CREATE TABLE `Event` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `title` varchar(255)
 -- Create "Event_SEQ" table
 CREATE TABLE `Event_SEQ` (`next_val` bigint NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
+ -- Initialize "Event_SEQ" table
+ insert into Event_SEQ values ( 1 );
```

Testing these changes can be done by running the application with a local database and creating the entity. To apply the migration directory
to the local database, use `atlas migrate apply`.

> We would love to hear your feedback :heart:. You can reach out to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT) or by opening an [issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-provider-hibernate/issues/new).

Reviewer 3: Feels foreign to put this here again in the note

Author: which part? just the part about the feedback or also the note about testing?

:::

### Running Atlas

We should now be able to view our schema using Atlas:

```bash
atlas schema inspect -w --env hibernate --url env://src
```

> Atlas has a lot more cool tricks, lets create a migration directory from our schema:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Atlas has a lot more cool tricks, let's create a migration directory from our schema:
```

```bash
atlas migrate diff --env hibernate
```

> By running `atlas migrate diff`, atlas compares the state of our Hibernate schema and the state of the schema in the `migration` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By running `atlas migrate diff`, Atlas compares the state of our Hibernate schema and the state of the schema in the `migration` directory.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="migrations/atlas.sum">

```
h1:Ezh6r7A0pU4XS7PztE87h+aq5PoGGVTd6kaprtpXxas=
20231211114848.sql h1:9ECs2QsjHE8S4PxXxFcoPYaOVUWRjpxHuF8MGFRd3dE=
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Atlas uses the `atlas.sum` file to protect against conflicting schema changes, you can read about it [here](/versioned/new#recalculating-the-directory-hash).

### Testing the migrations

Having a migration directory is nice and dandy, but we can also apply it to a database without breaking a sweat.
Let's start a local PostgreSQL instance:

```bash
docker run -it --rm --name mypostgres -p 5432:5432 -e 'POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password' postgres
```

And let the magic happen by applying our schema to the database:

```bash
atlas migrate apply --env hibernate --url 'postgres://postgres:password@0.0.0.0:5432/?search_path=public&sslmode=disable'
```

To see our java application running, add the following `hibernate.properties` file and run the main function:

```properties
hibernate.connection.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/postgres
hibernate.connection.username=postgres
hibernate.connection.password=password

hibernate.show_sql=true
hibernate.format_sql=true
hibernate.highlight_sql=true
```

> Observe the log output, you should see the SQL commands executed by Hibernate, similar to these:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Observe the log output, you should see SQL commands executed by Hibernate similar to these:
```

```
[Hibernate]
    select
        a1_0.name
    from
        Actors a1_0
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        Actors
        (name)
    values
        (?)
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        Movies
        (numberInSeries, title)
    values
        (?, ?)
[Hibernate]
    insert
    into
        MovieParticipation
        (actorName, movieId)
    values
        (?, ?)
```

Running the program again, you should see the output:

```
[Hibernate]
    select
        a1_0.name
    from
        Actors a1_0
Found Actor Keanu Reeves
```

### Making changes with confidence

> Lastly let's explore another powerful application of Atlas, linting the migration directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Lastly, let's explore another powerful feature of Atlas, linting the migration directory.
```

Suppose we make the following change:

```diff
--- a/src/main/java/org/example/Movie.java
+++ b/src/main/java/org/example/Movie.java
@@ -10,13 +10,10 @@ public class Movie {

     Movie(String title, Integer numberInSeries) {
         this.title = title;
-        this.numberInSeries = numberInSeries;
     }
     @Id
     @GeneratedValue(strategy = GenerationType.IDENTITY)
     public Long id;

     public String title;
-
-    public Integer numberInSeries;
 }
```

> Oh no! we removed a column, let's see what happens. Run `atlas migrate diff --env hibernate`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Oh no! We removed a column. Let's see how Atlas handles this change. Run `atlas migrate diff --env hibernate`.
```
